The Saeima1 has adopted
and the President has proclaimed the following Law:


Handling of Alcoholic Beverages Law


Section 1. 	Terms Used in this Law

	The terms used in this Law shall comply with the terms of objects to be imposed by the excise duty used in the Law on Excise Duty and the explanation thereof, as well as the terms used in the Advertising Law and the Radio and Television Law and the explanation thereof.

Section 2. 	Scope of Application of this Law

(1) This Law regulate any activities with alcoholic beverages [preparation for processing, processing, production, filling in packaging (pre-packaging), labelling, storage, loading, disembarkation, transfer, transportation, importation, exportation, distribution, purchase, marketing, elimination and similar], as well as the advertising of alcoholic beverages (hereinafter – handling of alcoholic beverages). 
(2) The Law is applicable also to retail trade in alcoholic beverages on trains, aeroplanes and ships, if these means of transport have been registered in Latvia.

Section 3. 	Types of Special Permits (Licences) and Basic Provisions for the Issuance Thereof

(1) A special permit (licence) (hereinafter – a licence) shall be necessary for wholesale trade in alcoholic beverages and retail trade in alcoholic beverages. If retail traders of alcoholic beverages sell only beer, a licence for retail trade in beer shall be necessary for them.
(2) A licence for wholesale trade in alcoholic beverages, a licence for retail trade in alcoholic beverages and a licence for retail trade in beer shall be issued by the licensing commission of the State  Revenue Service.
(3) A licence for wholesale trade in alcoholic beverages, a licence for retail trade in alcoholic beverages and a licence for retail trade in beer shall be issued for an indefinite period.
(31) If in addition to a permanent point of sale specified in a licence for retail trade in alcoholic beverages or in a licence for retail trade in beer, a booth for the retail trade in alcoholic beverages is requested (Section 6, Paragraph nine), the activity referred to in the relevant licence at the place specified shall be permitted for a period of not more than five months in a calendar year.
(4) A licence for wholesale trade in alcoholic beverages,  a licence for retail trade in alcoholic beverages and a licence for retail trade in beer shall not be issued (re-registered) if the point of sale given has been declared in the licence of another person.
(5) A licence for wholesale trade in alcoholic beverages, a licence for retail trade in alcoholic beverages and a licence for retail trade in beer shall give a right to perform the relevant activities only at the place specified in a licence and only the person  to whom this licence has been issued  shall be entitled to use it.
(6) The procedures for issuance, re-registration, cancellation and utilisation of a licence for wholesale trade in alcoholic beverages, a licence for retail trade in alcoholic beverages and a licence for retail trade in beer shall be determined by the Cabinet.
(7) The procedures for issuance, re-registration, cancellation and utilisation of  warehousekeepers activity licences, approved trader’s activity licences, as well as activity licences of a taxpayer’s representative shall be determined by the Law on Excise Duty and other regulatory enactments issued on the basis thereof.
[10 June 2004]

Section 4. 	Provisions for Handling of Alcohol

(1) Retail trade in alcohol shall be prohibited.
(2) The procedures for registration and control of alcohol for alcohol production, treatment, processing and packaging (pre-packaging), as well as for utilisation of such alcohol, to which the exemption from excise duty applies in accordance with Section 16, Paragraph one, Clauses 1, 2, 5 and 7-10 of the Law On Excise Duty , shall be determined by the Cabinet.
(3) Procedures for handling of alcohol in pharmacies, drug wholesalers, drug manufacturing undertakings (undertakings of pharmaceutical activity), veterinary pharmacies, veterinary drug wholesalers, veterinary drug manufacturing undertakings (undertakings of veterinary pharmaceutical activity), medical treatment institutions and veterinary medicine shall be determined by the Cabinet.

Section 5. 	General Provisions for the Procedures for Movement, Sale, Settlement of Accounts and Registration of Alcoholic Beverages

(1) Wholesalers and retailers of alcoholic beverages shall settle their mutual accounts regarding transactions with alcoholic beverages only through credit institutions, utilising only those current accounts declared to the Licensing Commission of the State Revenue Service. Mutual cash settlements  for wholesalers and retailers are prohibited.
(2) Settlement of accounts for retail trade in alcoholic beverages, as well as the mutual accounts of beer producers and retailers may be settled by cash settlements or non-cash settlements. Payment of cash made by a person to the credit institution account of a retailer or a beer producer shall also be regarded as a cash settlement.
(3) Moving or selling alcoholic beverages in wholesale only within the territory of Latvia (also between the places indicated in the alcoholic beverage licence of a seller), a strict accountability bill of lading-receipt shall be attached to each batch of alcoholic beverages, in which additional requisites shall be indicated. The requisites to be indicated additionally shall be determined by the Cabinet.
(4) If alcoholic beverages shall be moved in the cases specified in Section 25, Paragraphs one, two, four, five, six and seven of the Excise Duty, the accompanying documents indicated in Commission Regulation (EEC) No. 2719/92 shall be utilised, but in the cases specified in Section 26 of the referred to Law -- the accompanying documents indicated in Commission Regulations No. 3649/92. The procedure for handling and control of accompanying documents shall be determined by the Law On Excise Duty.
(5) Wholesale and retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed only at such sales points of alcoholic beverages which are specified in a licence and only on premises that are constructionally separated from a territory in possession of another person, except in the cases specified in this Law.
(6) At the places specified in a licence a clearly visible signboard shall be placed, in which the name of a licensed person and working hours of the relevant place of activity shall be indicated in the official language.
(7) The wholesale in alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in territories to which, in accordance with specified procedures, the status of a market has been assigned.
(8) The wholesalers and retailers of alcoholic beverages within the working hours notified shall ensure the possibility for the State Revenue Service to compare the actual amount of alcoholic beverages with the registration data.
(9) It is allowed to import such beer from non-member state of the European Union into Latvia, for which till the end of the term of validity not less than 30 days are left. This restriction does not apply to natural persons  who import beer for personal consumption in the amount specified by the regulatory enactments.
[10 June 2004]

Section 6. 	Retail Trade in Alcoholic beverages

(1) Retail trade in alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited:
      1) on the premises and territory of educational institutions and medical treatment institutions, the police, armed forces and other military bodies;
      2) in booths;
      21) in kiosks, on premises that have no sales rooms , as well as on premises that have not been put into exploitation;
      3) on premises where a sales room is smaller than 20 square meters; 
      4) at a sales point which is situated in an apartment building, if the common stairs or premises shall be utilised for the entrance to such  sales point;
      5) from 22.00 to 8.00., except such retail trade points in which alcoholic beverages are sold on tap and the consumption thereof is ensured on the spot, as well as duty-free shops;
      6) in automatic vending machines; and
      7) from vehicles, except specialised mobile shops;
(2) It is prohibited to sell alcoholic beverages to persons under 18 years of age. In order to verify the age of the buyer, the duty of the retailer shall be to demand the buyer present a personal identification document. At the request of the retailer or supervision and inspection body the duty of the buyer shall be to confirm his or her identity and age by presenting a personal identification document.
(3) It is prohibited to offer alcoholic beverages free of charge (except the tasting thereof), as a gift or as compensation for the purchase of other goods or for the receipt of services.
(4) The retailer shall ensure that consumers of alcoholic beverages in a sales room or in another point of sale of alcoholic beverages keep public order and sanitary norms.
(5) Retail sale in alcoholic beverages for consumption on the spot shall be allowed, if:
      1) the measurement method utilised ensures  that the precision of the volume of the alcoholic beverage obtained by the purchaser is not less than five per cent, and
      2) a possibility to check precision of the volume of alcoholic beverages sold using the verified beaker at the retail trade point shall be ensured at the request of a purchaser or an official of the supervision and inspection body .
(6) A licence for retail trade of alcoholic beverages, a licence for retail trade of beer or a notarised copy of a licence or a State Revenue Service certified copy of a licence shall be placed at the sales point so it could be visible for consumers.
(7) Cash settlements for alcoholic beverages shall be allowed only utilising cash register and cash-office systems. For cash settlements only such cash registers and cash-office systems shall be used which ensure printout of the name of the transaction (goods) on a cash receipt and registration of the sale of alcoholic beverages in the cash register or in the separate department of the cash-office system.
(8) The restrictions specified in Paragraph five of this Section do not apply to beer.
(9) The prohibition specified in Paragraph one, Clause 2 of this Section, does not apply to retail trade in industrially manufactured alcoholic beverages  which are sold on tap for consumption on the spot and in which the amount of absolute alcohol does not exceed six per cent by volume, if retail trade in those places is carried out, taking into account the provisions of Section 3, Paragraph 3.1 of this Law.
(10) The prohibition specified in Paragraph one, Clause 3 of this Section does not apply to retail trade in industrially produced alcoholic beverages, in which the amount of absolute alcohol does not exceed six per cent by volume and which are intended for off-premises consumption.
[10 June 2004]

Section 7. 	Packaging of Alcoholic Beverages

(1) Persons  who are dealing with the acceptance (purchase) of packaging are prohibited to receive (purchase), store and carry out other activities with glass, plastic and other kinds of packaging of alcoholic beverages, from which the excise duty stamp has not been disposed of, as well as to perform activities with it.
(2) At places where alcoholic beverages are sold it is prohibited to keep glass, plastic and other kinds of packaging for alcoholic beverages from which, after consumption of the drink, the excise duty stamp has not been disposed of. After the utilisation of the contents of a particular volume of each packaging of alcoholic beverages the labelling referred to shall be disposed of without delay.

