Chapter III
Breeder’s right

Section 23.	 Scope of Application of the Breeder’s Right

(1) No other person shall turn a variety into a source of income without a permit (licence contract) from an owner of the breeder’s right.  In compliance with the provisions of Section 24 of this Law a permit from the owner of the breeder's rights shall be necessary for the performance of the following activities related to the propagating material of a variety:
      1) production and propagation;
      2) preparation in conformity with sowing requirements in order to propagate the variety;
      3) offer for sale;
      4) sale or other type of marketing;
      5) exportation and importation; and
      6) storage for the purposes referred to in Clauses 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
(2) In compliance with the provisions of Section 24 of this Law, a permit from the owner of the breeder’s right for the activities referred to in Paragraph one, Clauses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this Section with the harvested product (including entire plant and parts of the plant) obtained by unauthorised utilisation of the propagating material of a protected variety is required unless he or she has had no opportunity to exercise his or her rights in relation to the referred to propagating material of the variety.
(3) The provisions of Paragraphs one and two of this Section shall also apply to such a plant variety:
      1) which is essentially derived from the protected variety if this protected variety is not itself essentially derived in such manner;
      2) which, in compliance with the provisions of Section 5 of this Law, insufficiently differs from the protected variety; and
      3) in the production of which the protected variety must be repeatedly utilised.
(4) The variety referred to in Paragraph three, Clause 1 of this Section shall be deemed to be essentially derived from another (initial) variety, if it:
      1) is predominantly derived from the initial variety or from a variety that is itself predominantly derived from the initial variety, while retaining the essential characteristics the origin of which has been determined by the genotype or combination of genotypes of the initial variety;
      2) is clearly distinguishable from the initial variety; and
      3) conforms to the essential characteristics of the initial variety the origin of which has been determined by the genotype or combination of genotypes of the initial variety, except for the differences that have arisen during the process of derivation.
(5) A variety may essentially be derived by selecting natural or induced mutants, somaclonal variants or individuals that differ from the initial variety, as well as by utilising backcrossing or transformation by genetic engineering or other methods.

Section 24.	 Restrictions of the Breeder’s right

(1) In order to ensure agricultural production, the producers of agricultural products have the right without the permission of the owner of the breeder’s right to utilise for propagation of harvested products, which are acquired in the fields in his or her ownership or possession from a variety protected in Latvia that they have sown themselves (which is not a hybrid or synthetic variety), if the following plant species are grown: yellow lupine (Lupinus luteus L.), lucerne (Medicago sativa L.), peas (Pisum sativum L.), field beans (Vicia faba L.), common vetch (Vicia sativa L.), oats (Avena sativa L.), barley (Hordeum vulgare L.), rye (Secale cereale L.), triticale (x Triticosecale Wittm.), soft wheat (Triticum aestivum L. emend. Fiori et Paol.), potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.), turnip rape [Brassica napus L. (partim)], flax (Linum usitatissimum L.), except for fibre flax.
(2) The producers of agricultural products, who have small holdings, may utilise the plant species referred to in Paragraph one of this Section for the propagation of harvested products in their own holdings without paying a reimbursement to the owners of breeder’s rights.
(3) A small holding within the meaning of this Law is such a holding in which ownership or possession the total area of the plant species referred to in Paragraph one of this Section (except for potatoes) does not exceed 20 hectares, but for potatoes – three hectares.
(4) If other producers of agricultural products without the permission of the owner of the breeder’s right utilise for propagation the plant species referred to in Paragraph one of this Section, they shall pay a remuneration in the amount of 50 per cent from the remuneration for a licensed propagating material of the same variety for the same area.
[17 November 2005]

Section 25.	 Exceptions of the Breeder’s right

      Breeder’s right shall not apply to operations:
      1) which have been performed privately and for non-commercial purposes;
      2) which have been carried out for experimental purposes;
      3) the objective of which is to derive new varieties, except in cases where the provisions of Section 23, Paragraph three of this Law are applied in respect of the operations with varieties referred to in Section 23, Paragraphs one and two of this Law; and
      4) with the propagating material of the protected variety, the harvested product (including entire plant and parts of the plant) and any material acquired from the harvested product or varieties referred to in Section 23, Paragraph three of this Law if the breeder has sold or otherwise put into circulation (or if such has taken place with his or her consent) such material or varieties, unless any of the following operations have been performed:
      a) further propagation of the protected variety, or
      b) exportation of the propagating material of the protected variety, harvested product (including entire plant and parts of the plant) and any material acquired from the harvested product, which would provide an opportunity to propagate the variety in a state which does not protect varieties of the genera and species to which the referred to variety belongs, except in cases where such material to be exported is intended for final consumption. 

Section 26.	 Term of Validity of the Breeder’s Right

(1) Breeder’ s rights shall be acquired on the day when a decision on the granting of the breeder's rights is taken and shall be in effect until the end of the twenty-fifth calendar year, but for potatoes and with respect to the species of vine and tree varieties, until the end of the thirtieth calendar year from the year of granting the right.
(2) After the receipt of a reasoned application from the owner of the breeder’s right, the State Plant Protection Service has the right to extend the term referred to in Paragraph one of this Section for another five years.
[17 November 2005]

Section 27.	 Transfer of the Breeder’s right

(1) An owner of the breeder’s right is entitled to transfer the granted breeder’s right:
      1) fully – to a successor to the breeder’s right;
      2) in part – with an authorisation or a licence contract in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 of this Law.
(2) The breeder’s right shall be transferred in writing and they shall be in effect from the day of registration in the State Plant Protection Service.

Section 28.	 License Contract

(1) An owner of the breeder’s right may transfer his or her right to utilise the protected variety as a source of income to another person upon mutual agreement entering into a non-exclusive licence contract or an exclusive licence contract, or by announcing the free right of use.
(2) A licence (also compulsory licence) contract and the change of the owner of the licence shall be registered in the State Plant Protection Service by making an entry in the Register. The licence contract shall be registered by the State Plant Protection Service if a copy of the document regarding the payment of the State fee has been submitted. An unregistered licence contract shall not be valid. If the operation of a licence is terminated, the relevant entry shall be made in the Register. Upon registration of the compulsory licence, the State fee shall not be paid.
[21 December 2006]

Section 29. 	Non-exclusive Licence

      In issuing a non-exclusive licence, that is, in granting the right to utilise a variety to a owner of a licence (licensee), an issuer of a license (licenser) shall retain the right to grant a licence for the same variety to third parties. The licensee is not entitled to transfer his or her rights to another person unless such agreement is provided for in the licence.

Section 30.	 Exclusive License

      Upon receiving an exclusive licence, the licensee shall acquire exclusive rights to utilise a variety in accordance with the provisions provided for in a licence contract. The licensor shall retain the right to utilise the variety to the extent provided for in the agreement.

Section 31.	 Free Right of Use

(1) An owner of the breeder’s right upon an agreement with the State Plant Protection Service has the right to publish a notice that any person for an appropriate remuneration is entitled to utilise a variety from the day the owner of the breeder’s right has been informed in writing thereof and the licence contract has been registered in the State Plant Protection Service.
(2) If the free right of use has been announced, the fee for the protection of a plant variety shall be reduced by 50 per cent starting with 1 January of the following year.
(3) Based on an application of an owner of the breeder’s right and after receiving the consent of all owners of free right of use, the State Plant Protection Service is entitled to cancel the operation of the free right of use.

Section 32.	 Compulsory Licence

(1) If the market is not provided with propagating material of a protected variety that is significant for the State economy or the interests of the public, any person who wishes to produce and sell such a variety in Latvia, has the right to bring an action in a court for the granting of a compulsory licence. The compulsory licence shall also include the right to receive the propagating material from the owner of the breeder’s right.
(2) The State Plant Protection Service shall issue a compulsory licence on the basis of a court adjudication and make a relevant entry in the Register thereof. The court shall also determine the level of utilisation of the variety and other licensing provisions. The remuneration for utilisation of a variety shall be the same as for a non-exclusive licence for the relevant species. Depending on the circumstances of the case, the court may cancel the compulsory licence or determine new licensing provisions.

Section 32.1	Implementation of Breeder’s Rights if a Biotechnological Invention is Protected by a Patent

(1) If a breeder wants to acquire breeder’s rights to a plant variety or to utilise it using a protected biotechnological invention, he or she shall obtain a licence for the utilisation of the biotechnological invention and pay a remuneration for this.
(2) A breeder may apply for a compulsory licence for the non-restricted utilisation of an invention protected by a patent if:
	1) the acquisition of an ordinary licence from the owner of the patent has not been successful; and
	2) he or she can prove that the protected variety constitutes significant technical progress of considerable economic importance compared with the invention claimed in the patent.
(3) If the owner of the patent utilises a variety protected with a breeder’s right, the owner of the breeder’s right has the right to apply for a cross-licence and remuneration. 
[17 November 2005]


Section 33.	 Certification or Conformity Assessment of Propagating Material

      The certification or conformity assessment of the propagating material of varieties for which the breeder’s right has been granted in Latvia or they are protected by European Union breeder’s rights shall be carried out if the grower or the processor of the propagating material is an owner of breeder’s right or he or she has a licence contract registered with the State Plant Protection Service.
[17 November 2005]

Section 34.	 Examination of Variety During Protection Period Thereof

(1) In order to examine the uniformity and stability of a variety during its protection period, the State Plant Protection Service has the right to request that the owner of breeder’s right provides the propagating material, documentation and other information that is necessary for the performance of an examination.
(2) [17 November 2005]
[17 November 2005]

Section 35.	 Provision of Information regarding Utilisation of a Protected Variety

      Upon a request of the owner of breeder’s right, agricultural production producers, processors and providers of other services, as well as the State Plant Protection Service and the Rural Support Service shall provide him or her with the necessary information regarding the production, propagation, processing and sale of the propagating material of protected varieties.
[21 December 2006]

Chapter IV
Loss of Effect and Cancellation of Breeder’s right

Section 36.	 Loss of Effect of Breeder’s right

(1) Breeder’s right shall loose effect if at least one of the following circumstances arise:
      1) the owner of breeder’s right has not paid the State fee in accordance with Section 22 of this Law.
      2) the owner of breeder’s right does not provide the propagating material, documentation or other materials that are necessary for the examination of maintenance of a variety;
      3) provisions of Sections 6 or 7 of this Law are no longer complied with;
      4) the owner of breeder’s right himself or herself notifies in writing that he or she waives the breeder’s right; and
      5) the State Plant Protection Service has recognised the denomination of a variety as unsuitable and the owner of breeder’s right within a time period of three months has not proposed a new denomination conforming to the provisions of Section 20 of this Law.
(2) If there is a legal basis to construe that the breeder’s right has lost effect, the State Plant Protection Service prior to taking the decision shall notify the owner of breeder’s right thereof by specifying the reason of such an action, as well as by providing a time period for the rectification of the circumstances referred to in Paragraph one of this Section.

Section 37.	 Cancellation of Breeder’s right

      The breeder’s right shall be cancelled in any of the following cases:
      1) in taking a decision on the granting of the breeder’s right the provisions of Sections 4 or 5 of this Law have not been complied with;
      2) the granting of the breeder’s right has been mainly based on the information and documents provided by a breeder, but in taking a decision on granting the breeder’s right the provisions of Sections 6 or 7 of this Law have not been complied with; or
      3) the breeder’s right has been granted to a person who has no legal rights thereto.
      
      
Chapter V
Liability for Infringement of Breeder’s Right

Section 37.1	Right to Submit an Application to the Court Regarding Infringement of Breeder’s Right

	An owner of breeder’s right, a successor of rights or an authorised representative thereof (hereinafter – claimant) may submit to the court an application regarding infringement of breeder’s right. The owner of the licence is entitled to submit the application regarding infringement of breeder’s right with the consent of the owner of breeder’s right. The consent of the owner of breeder’s right shall not be necessary if the right of the owner of the licence to submit independently to the court the application regarding infringement of breeder’s right has been determined in the contract or the owner of breeder’s right does not submit the application, even though the owner of the licence has invited him in writing to do it. Any owner of the licence is entitled to intervene into the matter and to claim a compensation for the losses incurred by him or her due to an illegal use of the variety referred to in the licence contract.
[21 December 2006]

Section 38.	 Procedures for Determination of the Amount of the Compensation for Losses and Moral Injury

(1) If infringement of breeder’s right has happened due to the fault of a person, the claimant is entitled to request a compensation for losses and moral injury caused.
(2) The amount of the compensation for losses and moral injury shall be determined in accordance with the Civil Law. The unfairly obtained profit of such person may be taken into consideration when determining the amount of the compensation for losses, who has used breeder’s right illegally.
(3) If, in accordance with Paragraph two of this Section the amount of actual losses may not be determined, the amount of the compensation for losses shall be determined in keeping with the sum which the claimant might receive if a person who has used breeder’s rights illegally had paid reimbursement for the use of propagating material.
[21 December 2006]

Section 39.	 Compensation for Losses Caused in Relation to the Temporary Protection of a Variety

      If a third party utilises a propagating material of a variety, provisions of this Law in relation to the infringement of the breeder’s right shall be applied from the day of publication of the application. In such case, only such losses shall be compensated as relate to the remuneration for the utilisation of a variety, unless the owner of the breeder’s right has warned the relevant persons of the registration of the application prior to its publication. The losses shall be compensated from the day of receipt of the warning, but not earlier than from the day of registration of the application in the State Plant Protection Service.

Section 40.	 Liability for Infringement of Breeder’s right

      Persons who have infringed the breeder’s right shall be held liable in accordance with the procedures prescribed by law.


Transitional Provisions
[17 November 2005]

1. The Law On the Protection of Plant Varieties (Latvijas Republikas Augstākās Padomes un Valdības Ziņotājs, 1993, No. 18; Latvijas Republikas Saeimas un Ministru Kabineta Ziņotājs, 1995, No. 22; 1999, No. 23) is repealed.
[17 November 2005]

2. The Cabinet shall:
	1) by 1 January 2006 issue the regulations referred to in Section 18, Paragraph one of this Law;
	2) by 1 June 2006 issue the regulations referred to in Section 14, Paragraph one of this Law; and
	3) by 1 December 2007 issue the regulations referred to in Section 18, Paragraph two of this Law.
[17 November 2005]

3. The provisions of Section 33 of this Law in relation to the conformity assessment of propagation materials shall come into force on 1 April 2006.

4. Section 37.1 and the new version of Section 38 of this Law shall come into force on 1 March 2007.
[21 December 2006]

Informative Reference to European Union Directives

The Law contains legal norms arising from:
1)  Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions; and
2)  Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property rights.
[17 November 2005; 21 December 2006]



